>> REGINA MEREDITH: We all know
that our family dynamics create
deep programs within us that are
difficult to break and can even
compromise or ruin the
quality of our lives.
But what if we could go
back and re-create them
in a three-dimensional sense?
That's what Family Constellation
Therapy facilitates,
a recognition and re-creation
of the broken dynamics that
have held us back.
Elmar Dornberger, who has been
a facilitator for more than a
decade, has seen resolutions
that, I would say,
are just short of miraculous.
And welcome here to
share this with us.
I
I've been curious about
this for quite some time.
And actually, my son was in
a group that was doing this
and said, mom, you've
got to check this out.
This is really powerful stuff.
And it just so happened
I had just contacted you,
so the universe was
working in sync.
And I'd love to
know, first of all,
this is a modality that
came out of Germany.
What was the original basis
of it, the original protocols
and basis and thought behind it?
>> ELMAR DORNBERGER:
First, thank you, Regina,
for having me on the show.
So a person named
Bert Hellinger,
he's the founder
of this modality.
And he used to live in Africa
and worked with the Zulus
for many years.
And he noticed that when
there were issues in the tribe
or in families, they would
always honor the ancestors.
So they would look
back to the ancestors
and notice if there
was anything that
might have been passed
from the ancestors
to that particular
person or family.
So he noticed that there was
great worship done and honoring
to the whole family lineage
and actually to both the living
and to the dead.
So he noticed that the
dead are not necessarily
no longer present.
So there was actually some kind
of an energy form still existed
even in the present family.
And later on he studied many
modalities actually here
in the United States, and then
he started combining them.
And so Family
Constellation is really
a combination of
different modalities,
but it did come from
this idea that patterns
are being passed down
to us from ancestors.
>> REGINA: Which
makes total sense.
It's been thought that a lot
of our emotions and thought
and so forth are connected --
and experience are connected
in with the DNA, right?
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: So this would make
sense that we have inherited
certain of these maybe deep
familial memories and patterns
and behaviors.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
And especially in the
last 5 to 10 years
science has almost kind of
caught up with this modality.
And it's actually
been proven now
that DNA carries more than
just structural things
but also emotional aspects.
>> REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
And so let's talk about
birth trauma, for one.
Let's just start
the journey of life.
And then I want to show a little
video, which is just something
I grabbed off of
YouTube that has
people kind of going
through a session.
But to someone new to it,
they'd say, what are they doing?
And maybe you can
give us the kind
of symbolic elements of that.
But first of all, what
happens in our birth?
Because so many
people who have been
able to go back to
the birth process find
it was very traumatic.
It didn't seem to be
part of a process that's
natural to our species, that's
lovingly embraced and gone
through with grace
on both sides.
It always seems there's some
sort of trauma around it.
>> DORNBERGER: I think birth
in itself is a process.
And I'm not sure if birth
in itself is trauma.
I don't know about that.
But we know that there
are aspects around birth
that can be traumatic.
Let's say if a
baby is immediately
taken away from mom.
If you think about it,
this baby has been with mom
for nine months, and suddenly
she's just ripped away.
And this baby doesn't
know where am I now.
Is this is a safe place?
I was safe before, and
now suddenly I'm alone.
And now am I still safe?
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DORNBERGER: So very often
when I work with clients
and something like
this comes up,
then we actually
explore what was it?
What were the details of birth
or what happened around it
that were possibly traumatic.
>> REGINA: Yes.
That make sense.
Yes.
OK.
So to set things up, let's look
at what maybe a standard 3D
group experience
might look like.
>> DORNBERGER: Sure.
>> REGINA: And these
are just pictures.
So what do we have here?
We have people on the
side and these two people
that seem to be the main people.
What are they doing?
>> DORNBERGER: So since this
is not my constellation,
but I could imagine maybe
this represents-- very often,
actually, in a group there are
strangers that come together.
And then one person is a client.
And then the client,
sometimes they
choose other representatives to
represent parts of their family
system, or whatever they are
struggling with at the moment.
So earlier we saw
these two women.
Maybe one was
representing herself,
and maybe one was
representing her mom.
And these others could be other
parts of the family system.
>> REGINA: So they can
be just surrogates.
They can be--
>> DORNBERGER: Yes, exactly.
>> REGINA: --people
from within the group.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
And these people, usually
they don't know anything
about the client or
their background.
And often even the
facilitator knows very little.
So sometimes there is
maybe a one-minute or maybe
a five-minute interview
before the process starts.
>> REGINA: OK.
>> DORNBERGER: So nobody
really knows the details.
But what happens
through these formations
that kind of sometimes
naturally occur
and sometimes also a facilitator
might probe something.
They might say, how about if
you stand in this formation,
and we'll notice what comes out?
So there's not really
a prescribed process.
>> REGINA: But this
is the 3D part of it.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Placing real people
in real space approximate
to the individual.
>> DORNBERGER: And what actually
happens then when we stand
in somebody else's
place, believe it or not,
we actually can start feeling
what that person actually felt
at that time.
>> REGINA: Just by
standing in their place?
>> DORNBERGER: Just by
standing in their place.
So I don't know if you've
heard of Rupert Sheldrake.
>> REGINA: Yes, I know Rupert,
and I've interviewed him
as well, yes.
Beautiful work.
>> DORNBERGER: So he talks
about the morphic field.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DORNBERGER: And this is
almost sort of an application
of the morphic field, where we
actually through an arrangement
of energies, each
person is an energy,
we create an energy field.
And that field becomes alive.
And that field then actually
represents the family system.
And so whatever actually
somebody says in that place
is as close as it can be to
what that person would actually
be saying.
>> REGINA: So would this also
have to do with the fact that
these people have come together
with this particular intention,
so they've opened
themselves to that field?
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
>> REGINA: So it really can be
as simple as we're here to do
this.
And then if you have an
open heart or an open mind,
you step into that.
And when you're playing
out what the dynamic may
have been in that family, as
you say, through the field
you're absorbing real truths.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
>> REGINA: And this happens
a lot with strangers.
The truth starts coming out.
>> DORNBERGER: And at times,
I even had skeptics showing up
who didn't think that
this was really true.
And so I asked them, so
you can just participate,
and if you feel like
you want to step in
and you want to be
a representative,
feel free to do so.
And every time even
a skeptic stepped in,
the same thing happened.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
That's powerful.
Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: So it's not
necessary that you have
to believe in it or you have
to be psyched up for it or you
have to have positive
feelings towards it.
>> REGINA: You just have to
choose to be part of that
reality.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Interesting.
OK.
We've talked about
birth a little bit.
Let's go into our early
infancy and the area
that you talk about
called blind love.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
You have children?
>> REGINA: I have one son.
>> DORNBERGER: We all
have been children.
So if you think about
when parents give us life,
we come to this world, we
have very little to nothing
really to give back
to our parents.
They give us love.
They give us shelter.
They give us food.
They protect us.
They spend money for us.
And there's nothing really
we can give in return.
We don't have any money.
We don't have really
anything to give to them.
So what we do give, and what
pretty much every child does,
is to have love for our
parents, to have empathy,
to have compassion.
And this can actually
go as extreme
as if there is an
issue in the marriage
or in the relationship,
the child is actually
trying to step in to save that.
There's also another
aspect why this
is happening too
is because we are
both 50% our mother
and our father.
So whatever they are feeling,
we can feel into that.
So we have empathy for
that, and it almost
is our own feelings get
triggered through that.
So when our mother is
hurt, we want to step in,
and we want to help.
And this goes as far as
that sometimes children,
they sacrifice themselves for
the love of their parents.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DORNBERGER: Like when
children act out in schools,
when they maybe even
reach out for drugs,
when they are
failing in classes,
when they act out
with other children,
very often this actually
comes from a place of love.
Because they want
that the parents
are coming back together again.
So when I act out, when
I'm sick, when I'm home
and I'm saying, I can't
go to school, I'm sick,
the parents immediately show up.
So they know when I'm doing
something that is actually
against the grain
or against what
I'm supposed to do the
parents will respond.
>> REGINA: What's interesting is
if we now live in an era where
a very high percentage of
the homes are broken homes,
where parents have left
each other and children are
in single-parent families.
When you work, depending
on the generation,
with people, is it the
same dynamic or different
between families
that are together
but dysfunctional and
unhappy versus those
who have chosen to
split apart because they
don't want the dysfunction?
>> DORNBERGER: Right.
>> REGINA: Is there a distinct
flavor of the impact on us,
as the child?
>> DORNBERGER: Sure.
I want to say for the
child it's always difficult
if family splits.
Because for them, they
feel like I have to split,
because part of me is my mom.
>> REGINA: You have
to be loyal to both.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
And how can I be loyal?
And especially if
one partner speaks
bad about the other
partner, because then,
again, that hurts the child,
because the child, again,
is both mother and father, 50%.
On the other hand, when
there is a positive break,
meaning that both parents really
hold this in their highest
esteem, in their
best intentions,
it can be OK for the child,
that the child does not
feel like I have to choose
and one time I'm over here
and my life is different
than when I'm with my mother
or with my father.
And if that can be
regulated in a way
that the child is just switching
homes, just switching a room,
switching a building versus
having to totally adjust
to a totally different
lifestyle, then, I think,
a child can still be very
productive and very positive
and not damaged.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
So theoretically,
whether a family actually
splits up or doesn't, it's
the tension and dysfunction
in the family that seems
to be the difference.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yeah.
>> REGINA: Hmm.
So you have all
these little-- well,
they look like little
clothespin toys here,
little people, little families.
A see a little hat
on one of them.
Must be dad.
>> DORNBERGER: There you are.
>> REGINA: So who
are these people?
And what are you going
to show us with this?
>> DORNBERGER: So the reason I
brought these is because I do
this work three different ways.
I work with families.
I also work with individuals.
I work with couples.
I also work with organizations.
And sometimes I have clients
who don't necessarily
want to go to a group setting.
They don't want to be
exposed to 20 strangers.
And they feel more I want to do
this in the privacy of just one
single person that
I'm working with.
So I kind of
created these tools.
And the reason I have two sides
here, these are kind of people
and these are things, is
because, as you kind of saw
before in the
three-dimensional world
when we work with actual
people, they can speak.
And then we can ask them
about, how do you feel?
So when you stand here and
your father stands next to you,
how does it make you feel?
And your mother stands over
there, how do you feel?
So we have sort of
a dialogue, and we
can start understanding
what the dynamics is.
So when we work
one-on-one, we work
with dead wood, so to speak.
There's no communication here.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DORNBERGER: So I
devised these parts here.
This is all pieces of
wood, and some of them,
they look like a tree.
>> REGINA: Little tree, yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: And some, they're
a little bit more smooth.
So if we use these elements
and we say, OK, so this is me,
this is my dad, and
I have a conflict.
So I can't really--
as a facilitator
I can't quite figure out
what kind of conflict is this
and where is it and who
owns it and how big is it.
And if I just use these
pieces and I ask them,
so would you mind
just picking something
that shows me your conflict?
So if somebody takes this and
says, so this is my conflict,
I get sort of a sense
of what this might be.
They might also choose this
and say, this is the conflict.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
This is a much more potent
conflict, it looks like.
>> DORNBERGER: So we
have a different sense.
Then my next question
or one of the questions
could be, this
seems to be so big,
you can hardly even
look over this.
You can't even see your
dad because this is so big.
>> REGINA: So it gives
you a starting place.
>> DORNBERGER: Exactly.
And very often when I work
with clients they say,
well, I don't know how I feel.
What do you mean you
want to know how I feel?
It's complicated, you know?
I love him and I hate him.
Oh, so you love him
and you hate him.
So is this the hate?
So what would the
love look like?
Well, the love would be
maybe-- and they look around.
>> REGINA: I see a
little tiny log there.
>> DORNBERGER: Yeah.
Yeah, actually this
is a smallest here.
So they might take this, and
then they might put this here.
>> REGINA: I see.
>> DORNBERGER: So we
actually start having
a three-dimensional arrangement.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DORNBERGER: And
then very often,
when there's a conflict with
dad there's also a conflict with
mom.
It's never just only one person.
It's always a triangle, or it's
always more than one thing.
So if I would ask, so
where's mom in this?
Well, you know,
mom is over here.
>> REGINA: And
she's looking away.
>> DORNBERGER: Exactly.
Mm hmm.
>> DORNBERGER: So the reason
they have eyes is so we
immediately can tell
what is the dynamics?
What's really happening here?
So believe it or not, within
probably less than five
minutes, when somebody
starts working with this,
this becomes their reality.
>> REGINA: No.
I can see that.
This tells a lot right here.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
>> REGINA: The father
and the child facing off.
This huge thing that's
grown between them.
Mom's looking the other way and
distanced from the whole thing.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: There's love there,
but it's not that accessible.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
It's not obvious.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Yeah, that
that's very cool.
>> DORNBERGER: So actually
within one session,
I can get so much information
that would take me weeks,
months.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
That's true.
>> DORNBERGER: Because how
would you describe the issue?
How would you describe
this in words?
Because the reason why
this person probably chose
this versus this can be
because this is complicated.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DORNBERGER: This is complex.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: And this just
has one little thing here.
So this gives us a very
different kind of feel.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
I like the way this feels.
It's very visceral,
and it brings up
representative
feelings appropriately.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: OK.
>> DORNBERGER: And then we can
ask, maybe at a later stage,
so if this is resolved, if
this would not be here anymore,
what happens to this?
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DORNBERGER: Well, you
know, I'm not quite sure.
And I'm still kind of
skeptical, and it's
going to take
something from him.
So what is it going to take?
Well, you know, he's
always distanced,
and I really need him closer.
So how close do you need him?
Well, I need him,
like, really close.
And as a matter of fact,
I need him actually here.
I don't need him to look at me.
I need him actually next to me.
And then, so what about this?
Oh, well, of course, you know,
well, I think it would maybe
it would be something like that.
>> REGINA: Aw.
It's really very sweet.
It's very innocent in doing it.
It brings up personal feelings,
but it's non-personal,
non-threatening the way you've
done that, the way you've
constructed it.
So this is what you
would do for someone
who is working with you
directly, just one-on-one,
without bringing all the
other people into it.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Does fear come up?
Do people feel really
vulnerable when
they're with the other
people in a group?
>> DORNBERGER: Sometimes.
Because they don't necessarily
know what's going to come out.
And especially if you have
a stranger representing
your family system, and if
it's very entangled or very
dysfunctional, there could be
a lot of stuff just coming out.
And that process--
unfortunately, we
don't have a live video
of how something really
happens-- it can get very vocal,
and it can be very personal.
So somebody might actually
really stand up and say,
I hate you because somebody
in the family system
actually feels that.
And if you sit
there as a client,
and you might be sitting
on the side watching this,
this is sometimes a
little bit hard to see.
And it's sometimes a
little bit shocking.
And then also what can happen
is when this comes a little bit
fast, you might
kind of shut down.
>> REGINA: Right.
So this is safer, with
inanimate objects.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
And because I don't
touch these anymore,
I have just the client
play with them--
>> REGINA: So it doesn't
put your energy in--
>> DORNBERGER: Yeah.
Because sometimes, when I
started this out, I would say,
well, you know, why
don't you try this out?
What would it be if you
would have a resource here?
And immediately they would
be like, what are you doing?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: They would get
really physical and emotional.
>> REGINA: Because you
were choosing for them
their experience.
>> DORNBERGER: And
this was their field.
I was intruding in their field.
It was like, don't do that.
This is me, and
this is my field.
You can't get in there.
And so, also, it
really kind of works
on their speed, whatever
they're ready to do.
If they're not ready actually
to talk about this yet,
they won't.
>> REGINA: Well, let's juxtapose
this to classical therapy,
talk therapy and timeframes
and effectiveness and so forth.
Why were you drawn to
this kind of therapy?
>> DORNBERGER: A couple
of different reasons.
So, I started out
doing regular therapy.
And I found after less than two
years I started to burn out.
Because I'm a very
empathetic person, and so
I would actually take
all this with me.
So at the end of the session,
at the end of the day,
I would have my backpack
full with all of this,
with all my clients,
all this stuff.
So that was one reason.
And I didn't know, really,
how to unload this.
How do you unload
this on a daily basis?
And the second reason was
also the effectiveness.
It would take me a long time
to actually find the truth.
And this might sound a little
bit harsh, but most of clients
when they first come
and see a therapist,
they don't tell you the truth.
I might have seen
a client for a half
a year, maybe a year until they
finally will tell me, oh, I
have these and these habits.
Oh, I just do this and
this on a regular basis.
It's like, excuse me?
>> REGINA: Why didn't
you mention this?
>> DORNBERGER: Didn't you
think this was important?
Oh, I didn't think about
it, or that was personal.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Yeah, this is personal.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
OK.
So you come to your therapist.
Do you still have things
that are personal?
And this doesn't really
happen that much when
we work with this, because
we just look at patterns.
We just look at
what is still here?
Why is your mom over here?
What's going on here?
Well, there's this thing,
and then there is this thing.
And there's a lot of things,
because she's over here.
And we don't even have
to necessarily name it.
So we just know,
OK, there's things.
If they feel safe,
they can name it.
I have clients who it
didn't feel safe at first.
And I said, OK, so we can
just work with things,
because we can
describe these things.
So why did you choose this
and you didn't choose this?
And they will tell me,
well, this is broken.
This has different parts.
This looks kind of--
>> REGINA: Sharp.
>> DORNBERGER:
--scary and sharp.
Exactly.
Yeah.
So they would just
describe the parts.
And by describing
the parts, they
would actually describe
kind of what was going on--
>> REGINA: Yes.
That makes sense, yes.
>> DORNBERGER: --what the
feelings are around this.
>> REGINA: Well, now what
age group can you engage
effectively in this?
Beginning at what age?
I would think little kids
would take to it like a duck
to water, no problem.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
It's interesting.
I just recently had a girl
who was about six years old.
And initially she didn't want
to totally engage in this.
I asked specific
questions about what
was going on in the family
and the family system,
and she just wanted
to kind of play.
And I noticed that she was
not going to engage with me.
That was not her style.
So eventually, I just said,
why don't you just play?
So she started playing.
And within the play,
what actually came out
was the family dynamics.
She set up her mom,
she set up her dad,
she set up her
grandfather, and then she
placed herself at a
very specific place.
And so we knew exactly
what was going on.
>> REGINA: Wow.
Safe.
>> DORNBERGER: Safe.
>> REGINA: Subconscious.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: That's beautiful.
And what kind of people
have the greatest resistance
to engage on this level?
>> DORNBERGER: It's hard to say.
Sometimes it's people who
are very much in their heads.
And they think they can really
just resolve things just
by thinking, not
necessarily by feeling.
So sometimes this
takes a little while.
But it doesn't take very long.
As soon as I start asking,
well, why this versus that, then
they can describe this.
And when they
describe the pieces,
they really start
describing feelings,
even if they didn't think
they can really feel
or they wanted to really
resolve this intellectually.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DORNBERGER: But we know
that our body really stores
our emotions.
And if we only do work here
and we don't touch this,
it doesn't really work.
It doesn't really last.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
That makes total sense.
>> DORNBERGER: This
needs to be part of it.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Even if you have the
cognizance of what's going on,
if it's not integrated
into the emotions-- yeah,
that makes sense.
So if you were to now show
us how a session flows,
so to speak, where you begin
your line of questioning,
and so forth, what does
a session begin like?
>> DORNBERGER: So usually, I
have this out when somebody
comes for the first time.
And I just tell them a
little bit about what I do,
and these are my
partners, and I've
been working with
them for a long time.
And they're very
good at their job.
And so I would just
say, why don't you
pick one for yourself
that would represent you?
And there is no right or wrong.
This whole thing is
really kind of the game,
and the rules are actually
really your rules.
They're not my rules.
My engagement is more sort of
like being a facilitator that's
sometimes a step
ahead, sometimes
a step behind,
but very close by.
And I just ask questions
for me to understand
what you're doing.
>> REGINA: OK.
Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: So why don't you
just pick one figure here that
would represent you?
>> REGINA: OK.
I like that one with the hat.
>> DORNBERGER: Good.
And in case if you decide
later that this was not
the right one, you can
always change them.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
It's a little hat.
I don't see any with hair.
>> DORNBERGER: Yeah.
They're either bald
or they have a hat.
>> REGINA: Either bald or hat.
Well, it's kind of
a cute little hat.
OK.
There's a little hat.
>> DORNBERGER: So let's
say you have an issue.
If that will be
resolved, your life
would be a little bit easier.
And you can either name
or not name it, whatever.
And so I would ask you either
if it's an issue with a person
you pick another person.
Or if it's an issue with
a thing, then you would--
>> REGINA: It's more of a
behavioral thing that I just
think is not effective.
It's not serving me any longer.
And that is when I
wake up in the morning,
I immediately go
and check the email,
do research, do all these
things that are in the head.
I wake up with it
lot of thoughts
and then engage in
the thought world
and forget all about the
physical world, pretty much.
>> DORNBERGER: Right.
>> REGINA: And then the
morning has gone on.
Maybe I haven't even
taken my pajamas off yet.
I haven't had any breakfast.
Now the big window for exercise
is already starting to pass.
And it's like I'm
too much in my head
and not in a good
ritualistic way engaging
in the physical world.
And I'd like to engage more
in physicality first thing.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
There is not really a
roadmap, so I don't really
have an answer.
I don't have an
answer for any problem
that anybody comes to me.
But any problem that
exists I think actually
comes already with
its own answer.
>> REGINA: Yes.
I think that's true.
>> DORNBERGER: So it's
sort of like a co-arising.
There's the issue,
and then somewhere
is also the resolution.
So we just need to kind of
stay with what actually is.
We stay with the issue,
and then we kind of notice
what actually wants to happen.
So it's not like,
OK, this is you,
and then there is the issue.
You want to be more embodied.
You want to be
more in your body,
not immediately
going to your head.
So it's not like we're
going to go now from here
and we're going to
jump into the solution.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DORNBERGER: That's usually
what coaching does and some
of those modalities.
They kind of say, OK,
this is your issue.
Let's rah, rah, rah.
Where do you want to be?
And then let's figure out
how will we get you there.
The constellation work is more
about we actually kind of hang
out in the issue
for little while.
So let's just kind of explore.
So what is the issue?
The issue--
>> REGINA: My brain's on fire
first thing in the morning.
>> DORNBERGER: Your
brain's on fire.
Good.
Excellent.
So let's choose something that
would represent your brain
is on fire.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
OK.
That one.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: It's got a
lot of stuff going on.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
Good.
You brain is on fire.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DORNBERGER: What else?
>> REGINA: That's when I feel
most energized with mental task
energy.
So if I'm going to start in
on research, for example,
I would be either starting
that or setting it up.
But I haven't really
set my day up yet.
So my brain's on fire.
It just goes and
runs amok before I
take the time to slow down
and integrate anything else.
>> DORNBERGER: Right.
Solution focused.
I want to see-- let's
just take this away.
But that might
not actually work.
>> REGINA: No,
that wouldn't work.
>> DORNBERGER: Right.
So usually what is in our
life, even the things that
don't necessarily work for us,
they have a positive function.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
It has a positive function.
>> DORNBERGER: So we need
to look at also the positive
function of this.
>> REGINA: The positive function
is I can get a lot done early
in the morning.
And the anxiety is if I
say, no, go out and do
your walk or your
little things that you
do for exercise and hike
with my little dog Ernie
early in the morning
and so forth, an anxiety
builds that I'm getting kind
of pushed away from the things
that I have to do.
It's like time, time.
It represents time.
>> DORNBERGER: You
just mentioned anxiety.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: So let's
represent the anxiety.
>> REGINA: This
one is the anxiety.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
And then you mentioned
tasks that you need to do.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
That would be maybe that
one with a lot of tree.
Yeah, that one.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
So now you have brain
on fire, anxiety, tasks.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DORNBERGER:
Anything else that--
>> REGINA: No, it
kind of stops there.
I do a lot of research, and
I'm dyslexic, mildly dyslexic.
And so I always feel
on the edge of control.
Am I going to get
my research done
on time, before I interview
you or someone, for example.
And there's a lot of it to do.
So I'm always feeling this
maybe artificial construct
that I'm behind on my
mental tasks, my research.
>> DORNBERGER: Feeling behind.
That's another part of this.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DORNBERGER: So we need
to have another piece.
>> REGINA: Wow.
All kinds of stuff.
OK.
That one is square.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
Wow.
So you see how complex
this already is.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
That's way more
complex than I thought.
I thought maybe I was lazy.
Good to know I'm not
lazy, just screwed up.
>> DORNBERGER: So there's a lot
going on before you actually
get to do it or before you
actually-- here are the tasks.
So brain on fire, anxiety--
>> REGINA: Anxiety.
If I take time
away from my brain
to go take care of
the physical world,
there's anxiety
that I'm not going
to get it all done on
some subconscious level.
>> DORNBERGER: Right.
>> REGINA: The reality
is I do get it done.
I do always get everything done.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: But that's the
mental part that is an illusion.
>> DORNBERGER: So we still
haven't even set up what you
desire to do, which is
your physical activity.
>> REGINA: To not have this
so I can do a little of this
and then jump into this
comfortably without worrying
about that getting done.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: So let's set
up that physical activity.
>> REGINA: That's funny,
because I don't know which piece
to draw for that piece.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
How about if we-- we could try--
>> REGINA: Maybe
something like this.
It's more smooth.
There's no anxiety around it.
It's nice.
It's pleasant.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: Yeah.
My thought was we could use
maybe another figure for you
as this other person.
>> REGINA: OK.
Yeah, that sounds
good, because I'm
having a harder time with this.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: So another person.
>> DORNBERGER: Select
which person would you be,
the person that would actually--
would do these activities.
>> REGINA: Maybe this one.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
So notice would that
be the right place
or if there's another
place for that person.
>> REGINA: There.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
So this is a desire of
yours, to become that person.
And would you want
this on a daily basis?
Or would you want this
just every once in a while?
>> REGINA: No, pretty regularly.
If not every day, most days,
to get in the habit of taking
care of the physical
reality first.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Or at least, do that.
This is OK.
I don't mind the brain on
fire, and do a little bit.
But then be able to
disengage from it
and then take care
of the physical
and go back to
everything else that
becomes the rest of the day,
instead of pushing this off
to the end of the day, where
often it won't get done.
>> DORNBERGER: So there's times
where this does not happen.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Well, there's time where I don't
engage back in the physical,
because it gets so late
in the day the day's gone.
And then I feel badly.
It's not good on
a lot of levels.
>> DORNBERGER: So we already
explored jumping from here
to here.
>> REGINA: Past this.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Past that.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes,
past this anxiety.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Past that.
Yeah.
And so somewhere in here
before all of this--
this is just the complexity of
work, so that would be good.
So I'm moving forward.
They're all facing forward.
>> DORNBERGER: Yeah.
>> REGINA: So if we can, since
we don't have a whole lot
of time, at this point
what would happen,
since we don't have time to
do an actual real session?
But I can see here
personally that this
is way more complex than I
thought it was. [CHUCKLES]
>> DORNBERGER: It is.
So there would be
questions like, again,
what's the positive aspect
of this, brain on fire?
What's the positive
of the anxiety?
>> REGINA: I don't know.
I don't know about what's
positive about anxiety, per se.
>> DORNBERGER: Sometimes
anxiety can be a drive.
When we feel anxious,
we feel like we kind of
have to do something.
We're going to have to act.
But again, if anxiety
becomes too strong,
then the actions are
sometimes not positive.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
And in this sense, it's just
kind of habitual almost.
It was subconscious.
I didn't even know I had
any anxiety around that.
>> DORNBERGER: Yeah.
So this process, as we
go deeper into this,
it brings out more
details about what's
actually really going on.
Because sometimes we
think it's only this,
but there's other parts.
And we need to make sure
that all parts are actually
addressed in a positive
way so that we don't just
take something out.
Because if we take a habit
out without replacing it
with something positive,
it will replace itself.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
And I don't particularly
want to replace that.
I only want to eliminate
that to get to this.
And then that represents the
exercise thing, whatever,
just the physicality, which
is getting into the day
physically, which
is beyond exercise.
Then re-engage
with the physical,
and then I'm ready
for all of this.
Then this doesn't really
cause much anxiety.
>> DORNBERGER: Right.
>> REGINA: It's only if I'm
putting it off that it creates
anxiety.
And so if I can feel
comfortable there, I'm cool.
>> DORNBERGER: So right now,
it just sort of looks to me
physically, spatially, that this
is in the way from getting from
here to here.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
It is.
It does appear that
way, doesn't it?
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
Yes.
An obvious question
could be, would there
be a place, without getting rid
of this, to move it to a place
where you're still engaging
with it and it's still there
but it's not in your
way of getting there.
>> REGINA: Yes, to make
this engagement more brief
and pointed, maybe, and then
leave the rest over in this
area.
This is spilling over into
here is what's happening.
Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: So could
you engage in this,
acknowledge it in the morning.
So you get up and say,
oh, OK, I'm ready,
and I'm going to
just pause this.
I'm paying attention to you.
Because this is very
important to you, because this
is part of your livelihood.
This is part of who you are.
This is part of how you
engage in your work.
So we do not want
to get rid of this.
So is there -- physically, could
you move this to a place where
it would not obstruct
you to go here?
>> REGINA: I could
move it right here.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: That would be the
most healthy lineup of all,
I think.
Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: So
does that still work?
Just notice.
>> REGINA: I feel a little
anxiety around removing it
entirely.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
And we talked about
not to remove it.
So here's your anxiety.
>> REGINA: Mm hmm.
>> DORNBERGER:
What's the anxiety?
What's happening
with the anxiety?
>> REGINA: It's almost like--
and I know a lot of people will
relate to this-- I feel
like once my brain's going
and I've kind of
sorted through my day,
then I need to go just clear
email from around the world,
just clear my email.
If I just clear it
and don't get engaged
with lengthy answers or anything
and just check, check, flag,
flag, that could
be a healthy way
to do it without taking
up a lot of time.
And then just getting
right on to the rest of it
and getting on this, so I
could maybe shorten that time.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
So would this part be
OK with doing that?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: What
about the anxiety?
>> REGINA: It feels like
that would be all right.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
So is there a time
limit to that?
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DORNBERGER: What's
the time limit?
>> REGINA: No more
than 30 minutes.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: No more than.
>> DORNBERGER: So how
could you set that up that
you're actually
sticking to that?
>> REGINA: Mm, I just
have to choose that,
make that decision.
>> DORNBERGER: Do you
have a clock somewhere?
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> DORNBERGER: Or do you
have a clock on your computer
or something?
>> REGINA: Yeah, I do.
And it could be less than
that too, just clear and go.
Yeah, and just say, email is OK.
Don't engage in the rest of it.
And then when you're
exercising, it's
actually a good time
to plan out the day
and think about things anyway.
So yeah, to narrow that down
but not eliminate it I think
is a good solution.
>> DORNBERGER: OK.
>> REGINA: So there you go.
>> DORNBERGER: So we'll
just leave this for now?
>> REGINA: We'll just
leave that for now.
I'm sure there's much more,
but we're about out of time.
So let me just ask you one
or two more quick questions.
When you have a therapist
or a facilitator
that is anxious or
messed up or whatever
and you're working in
this field together,
how is that going to affect
the outcome for the client?
>> DORNBERGER:
Very good question.
So I hope that every facilitator
who facilitates this work
does a lot of work on
themselves before they do this.
Because what happens-- and this
happens to every therapist--
that if you have not resolved
an issue, you can get triggered.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> DORNBERGER: When
somebody talks about trauma,
talks about abuse, you can get
triggered with your own issue
that you have not resolved.
And it's the same here.
>> REGINA: And then that
puts it into the field,
which is damaging.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes.
And it's sort of
like a blind spot.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> DORNBERGER: It's like you're
not actually noticing that
there's somebody in trauma right
over here and I'm not actually
seeing it.
And somebody's standing
there in the trauma,
and I don't see it because
I'm not sensitive to it.
>> REGINA: Right.
That makes sense.
Any final thoughts?
I think this is fun.
I like your family here.
>> DORNBERGER: Thank you.
>> REGINA: Your
little associates.
It's very--
>> DORNBERGER: And
thank you for playing.
>> REGINA: --visceral.
It's very quick.
I like it.
It's fun.
And I don't know how it
is in the big grouping,
but I know my son was
saying it was amazing,
the breakthrough that
the woman he was watching
had going through this.
So any final thought
before we sign off here?
>> DORNBERGER: Well, this work
is the same as in the group
where people are
actually talking.
The structure is the same.
The only thing that
is different is really
that these guys can't talk.
So the client has to
do more of the talking
and has to be more actually
engaged in the process.
But the processes is the same,
and the result is the same.
>> REGINA: It sure seems
a lot quicker than sitting
and chatting about
something, I'll say that.
I see why you ditched
that part of your career.
>> DORNBERGER: Yes, thank you.
>> REGINA: Who needs
everybody's stories?
We'll create our own right here.
Thank you so much, Elmar,
for taking the time.
I appreciate it.
This was fun.
>> DORNBERGER:
Thank you, Regina.
>> REGINA: A little
free therapy too.
>> DORNBERGER:
Thanks for having me.
>> REGINA: To connect
directly with Elmar's work,
you can go to his website
at hemisphereconsulting.com.
To find a facilitator
closer to you,
can just google
constellation therapy
and the name of
your city or region.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.